--
layout: post
title: "Yoga at the Ritz 10 - Mindful Moon Flow"
date: 2024-10-12
time: "7:30 - 9:30 AM" 
excerpt: "This yoga class begins with a mindful meditation then moves into a moderate flow with half moon as the peak pose. The full body workout ends with a gratitude meditation during Savasana"
description: "Yoga at Ritz is a fun class for all levels and ages with flowing poses and breathwork to build stability, flexibility, and mindfulness. These classes typically follow an arc of opening awareness, warm-up stretches, standing poses, balancing poses, inversions, grounding poses, and relaxation. There are two classes, one at 7:30 and one at 8:30. I adapt each class to the students who show up." 
categories: yoga
tags: ['Yoga at the Ritz']
location: "The Ritz-Carlton, Lake Tahoe"
org: "Tahoe Flow Arts and Fitness"
orgurl: "https://tahoeflow.com/"
spotify:  
image: "images/yoga/inhaleexhale.png"
---


## Details

**When:** {{ page.date | date: '%A, %B %*d, %Y' }} from {{ page.time }}   
**Where:** {{ page.location }}       
**With:** [{{page.org}}]({{page.orgurl}})   
**Description:** {{ page.description }}   
**Theme:** {{ page.excerpt }}         


## Class Outline

### 7:30 am Vinyasa Flow

- Opening breath-work meditation: "Inhale focus, courage, calmness, peace, love. Exhale distraction, fear, anxiety, chaos, judgement."" 
- Seated arm flow with twist
- Seated forward bend
- Knee to nose to easy back bend
- Heros pose with write rolls
- Childs Cobra 
- Shoulder pigeon
- Downdog Plank flow
- Three-leg dog to fallen star
- Vinyasa with low and high lunge
- Warrior I flow with humble warrior
- Warrior II flow with bound side angle and triangle
- Godess + Wide leg forward fold with headstand
- Warrior III with standing slit and half moon
- Tree to Standing Figure Four
- Dancing Shiva
- Chair to Boat
- Legs up wall
- Bridge
- Reclined figure four
- Reclined twists
- Shoulder stand
- Plow
- Savasana with gratitude meditation: For 10 breath cycles, think of something you are gratfule for on the inhale and offer a thank you on the exhale. 
 
 
### 8:30 am Moderate Flow

- Opening breath-work meditation: "Inhale focus, courage, calmness, peace, love. Exhale distraction, fear, anxiety, chaos, judgement."" 
- Seated arm flow with twist
- Seated forward bends with bolsters
- Heros pose with write rolls
- Cat Cow
- Childs Cobra 
- Downdog Bear flow
- Vinyasa with low and high lunge
- Warrior I flow
- Warrior II flow with triangle
- Godess + Wide leg forward fold
- Warrior III with standing slit and half moon
- Tree 
- Chair to Boat
- Legs up wall
- Bridge
- Reclined figure four
- Reclined twists
- Savasana with gratitude meditation: For 10 breath cycles, think of something you are gratfule for on the inhale and offer a thank you on the exhale. 
 
