---
layout: post
title: "Yoga at the Ritz 15 - Lyra Health Breakthrough Conference"
date: 2025-05-13
time: "6:30 - 8:00 AM" 
excerpt: "Today's yoga practice consists of two classes for the Lyra Health Breakthrough Conference. The Sunrise Yoga class at 6:30 invites participants to greet the morning with gentle movements that awaken the body, mind and breath. Accessible to all, you'll leave feeling more grounded and awake in your body for the rest of the day. The Breathwork & Meditation class at 7:30 invites participants take a meditative seat to work on breath and presence through different guided exercises to feel connected and attuned."
description: "ritz.md" 
categories: yoga
tags: ['Yoga at the Ritz']
location: "The Ritz-Carlton, Lake Tahoe"
org: "Tahoe Flow Arts and Fitness"
orgurl: "https://tahoeflow.com/"
spotify: 1V8M3YdCiTtB4cdPwjixe0
#image: "/images/yoga/ritz.png"
---

    

<iframe style="border*radius:12px" src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/playlist/{{ page.spotify }}?utm_source=generator" width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; clipboard*write; encrypted*media; fullscreen; picture*in*picture" loading="lazy"></iframe>  


## 🌅 Sunrise Yoga Class (45 min at 6:30)  

### Opening (5 min)  

- Welcome and introductions
- Reminder that all poses and actions are optional and to listen to your own body
- A few rounds of three-part breath to increase awareness, reduce stress reduction, enhance lung capacity, and improve focus.
- Intention setting: “I invite you to welcome this day with presence and ease, and to honor your own well-being as you care for others. Remember, you are supported by breath, by earth, and by community. Please take a moment to set an intention for today's practice.” 

### Warm-Up (10 min)  

- Neck Rolls / Shoulder Rolls
- Seated Cat/Cow (hands on knees or thighs)
- Seated Side Stretches
- Seated Forward Fold with leg massage
- Cat/Cow (5–6 rounds)
- Childs Pose
- Cobra Pose
- Tabletop

### Gentle Standing Flow (15 min) 

- Downward Dog 
- Forward Fold
- Mountain Pose  
- Half Sun Salutation   – 2X
	- Inhale: Reach arms up
	- Exhale: Cactus Arms
	- Inhale: Reach arms up
	- Exhale: Forward Fold 
	- Inhale: Halfway lift
	- Exhale: Fold
	- Inhale: Root to Rise
	- Exhale: Hands to heart
- Low Lunge Flow
- High Lunge Flow
- Warrior II  
	- Warrior II 
	- Reverse Warrior
	- Side Angle
	- Wide-Legged Forward Fold with twists
- Tree Pose - with guided meditation on taking up space
- Mountain Pose

### Floor Work (10 min)  

- Toe Squat Pose
- Seated Windshield Wipers
- Bridge Flow
- Leg's Up the Wall
- Knees to Chest Post
- Reclined Figure Four Stretch
- Reclined Twists
- Happy Baby Pose or Supta Baddha Konasana
- Any additional poses

### Closing (5 min)  

- Savasana
- Loving Kindness meditation (May I/You/We be Happy/Healthy/Safe.)
- Final intention: “May you carry this presence into the rest of your day.”
- Namaste 


## 🧘️ Breathwork & Meditation Class (30 min at 7:30)

### Opening  

- Welcome and introduction
- Setup in basic relaxation pose (savasana) with props (towels under head/neck and knees) 
- Gentle cueing to settle in: “Notice where your body makes contact with the ground."
- Intension setting: “I am exactly where I need to be.”

### Breath Awareness 

Begin to bring awareness to the natural breath.   
Notice the inhale and exhale, the rise and fall of your chest and belly.  
Let your breath be your anchor to the present moment.    

### Box Breathing  

Inhale for 4 – Hold for 4 – Exhale for 4 – Hold for 4. Repeat.  

Return to natural breath afterward and notice the effects. 

###  3-Part Breath  

Slowly come to a seat and place a bolster lengthwise on your mat, with the narrow end touching your hip. Glide into Grounding Spinal Twist Pose with your chest and left side of your face on the bolster and your arms at your side.  

Inhale deeply into your belly, chest, and colar bones then exhale completely. Your breath is slow, full, and grounded.

After 1 minute, return your breathing to normal, then switch sides and repeat. 

### Affirmation Meditation  

Gently come to a seat and place a block under the top of bolster to create a slight incline. Bring the base of your spin to the edge of the bolser. Place a towel under your knees and slower lower your back and head onto the bolster for supported Heart Pose. 

For this affirmation meditation, I invite you to silently repeat these phrases in your head. 

- I am grounded in this moment.
- I am connected to the earth.
- I am present with each breath.
- I am where I need to be.
- I am enough exactly as I am.
- I am safe in my body.
- I am strong, steady, and soft.
- I am open to receiving love.
- I am grateful for this breath.
- I am aligned with ease and purpose.

Take a moment to silently create and recite your own personal affirmation statements, or repeat any affirmations that spoke to you.


### Alternate Nostril Breathing (Nadi Shodhana) (4 min)

Slowly come to a comfortable seat, perhaps on a block or bolster.

We will close with one final breath practice to balances the nervous system, and clear the mind. 

For alternate nostril breathing, use the right thumb to close the right nostril and the right ring finger to close the left nostril. 

- Exhale completely.
- Close the right nostril and inhale fully through the left nostril. 
- Close your left nostril exhale completely through the right nostril. 
- With the left nostril closed, inhale fully through the right nostril.
- Close the right nostril and inhale fully through the left nostril. 
- With the right nostril closed, inhale fully through the left nostril.

Repeat 5–6 rounds, then release to natural breath


### Closing (3 min) 


Take a moment to reflect on this practice of breathwork and meditation.

Loving Kindness meditation (May I/You/We be Happy/Healthy/Safe.)

Thank you for showing up today and taking the time to focus on your mind, body, and breath. Namaste. 

